20230911 doc 8558 add zone config extension example (#17858)
cockroachdb/docs: src/current/v23.2/alter-database.md

To remove the changes made in this example, [reset the Zone Config Extensions](#reset-a-regions-zone-config-extensions).

#### Implement super regions

> In this example, we use [Zone Config Extensions]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/zone-config-extensions.md %}) to provide an alternative implementation of [Super Regions]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/multiregion-overview.md %}#super-regions), which are useful for [data domiciling]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/data-domiciling.md %}).

Reviewer: Per style (feel free to replace my suggestion though) https://github.com/cockroachdb/docs/blob/main/StyleGuide.md#style-and-tone

```suggestion
In this example, [Zone Config Extensions]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/zone-config-extensions.md %}) are used to provide an alternative implementation of [Super Regions]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/multiregion-overview.md %}#super-regions), which are useful for [data domiciling]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/data-domiciling.md %}).
```

{% include_cached copy-clipboard.html %}
~~~ shell
cockroach demo --nodes=9 --demo-locality=region=us-east1:region=us-east1:region=us-central1:region=us-west1:region=europe-west1:region=europe-west1:region=europe-central1:region=europe-east1:region=europe-east1
~~~

Next, enter the statements below at the SQL prompt. These statements will:

- Make the [`movr` database]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/movr.md %}) into a [multiregion database]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/multiregion-overview.md %}) by [setting the primary region]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/alter-database.md %}#set-primary-region).
- Set the `movr` database to [survive region failures]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/multiregion-survival-goals.md %}#survive-region-failures).
- Add the remaining regions we defined at cluster start time to the multi-region `movr` database (for a total of 6).

{% include_cached copy-clipboard.html %}
~~~ sql
ALTER DATABASE movr SET PRIMARY REGION "us-east1";

> ALTER DATABASE movr SURVIVE REGION FAILURE;

Reviewer 2: The `ALTER DATABASE movr SURVIVE REGION FAILURE;` will need to go after the `ADD REGION` commands.

Author: Thanks, this is updated in the latest commit

ALTER DATABASE movr ADD REGION "us-central1";
ALTER DATABASE movr ADD REGION "us-west1";
ALTER DATABASE movr ADD REGION "europe-west1";
ALTER DATABASE movr ADD REGION "europe-central1";
ALTER DATABASE movr ADD REGION "europe-east1";
~~~

Now that our multiregion cluster is configured, we will use the `ALTER LOCALITY` statements shown below to [configure replication zones]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/configure-replication-zones.md %}) such that:

- [Replicas]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/architecture/overview.md %}#architecture-replica) in the `us-east1` region are only stored on nodes in the US.
- Replicas in the `europe-central1` region are only stored on nodes in the EU.

{% include_cached copy-clipboard.html %}
~~~ sql
ALTER DATABASE movr ALTER LOCALITY REGIONAL IN "us-east1" CONFIGURE ZONE USING

>     num_replicas = 5,

Reviewer 2: We have 6 regions for the cluster, so with goal `REGION_FAILURE`, the num_replicas should be at least `numReplicas = maxFailuresBeforeUnavailability(numVotersForRegionSurvival) + (numRegions - 1)`, which is 2 + 6 - 1 = 7 in our case. I think we can do 
```
ALTER DATABASE movr ALTER LOCALITY REGIONAL IN "us-east1" CONFIGURE ZONE USING
    num_replicas = 7,
    constraints = '{+region=us-east1: 3,
                    +region=us-central1: 3,
                    +region=us-west1: 1}',
    lease_preferences = '[[+region=us-east1], [+region=us-central1]]';
```

Author: Thanks Jane, this is updated in the latest commit.  

I updated both the "us-east1" locality and the "europe-central1" locality with the `num_replicas=7` and the constraints to be `3,3,1`

    constraints = '{+region=us-east1: 3,
                    +region=us-central1: 3,
                    +region=us-west1: 1}',
    lease_preferences = '[[+region=us-east1], [+region=us-central1]]';
~~~

{% include_cached copy-clipboard.html %}
~~~ sql
ALTER DATABASE movr ALTER LOCALITY REGIONAL IN "europe-central1" CONFIGURE ZONE USING
    num_replicas = 7,
    constraints = '{+region=europe-central1: 3,
                    +region=europe-west1: 3,
                    +region=europe-east1: 1}',
    lease_preferences = '[[+region=europe-central1], [+region=europe-west1]]';
~~~

#### Minimize cross-region write latency

> In this example, we use [Zone Config Extensions]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/zone-config-extensions.md %}) to minimize cross-region write latency in a cluster with the following characteristics:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, [Zone Config Extensions]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/zone-config-extensions.md %}) are used to minimize cross-region write latency in a cluster with the following characteristics:
```

> - 3 main US regions (`us-west1`,`us-east1`,`us-central1`).

Reviewer: Seems best to spell out a numeral that begins a sentence, but it's just a guess

```suggestion
- Three main US regions (`us-west1`,`us-east1`,`us-central1`).
```

> - 2 additional distant regions (`europe-west1`, `asia-northeast1`). Only [follower reads]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/follower-reads.md %}) will be made from these regions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Two additional distant regions (`europe-west1`, `asia-northeast1`). Only [follower reads]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/follower-reads.md %}) will be made from these regions.
```

>     To minimize the cross-region write latency, we will [configure replication zones]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/configure-replication-zones.md %}) such that the 3 US regions have voting replicas (that is, replicas that participate in [Raft quorum]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/architecture/replication-layer.md %}#raft)). This will leave the 2 additional non-US regions with only [non-voting replicas]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/architecture/replication-layer.md %}#non-voting-replicas).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To minimize the cross-region write latency, [configure replication zones]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/configure-replication-zones.md %}) such that the 3 US regions have voting replicas (that is, replicas that participate in [Raft quorum]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/architecture/replication-layer.md %}#raft)). This will leave the 2 additional non-US regions with only [non-voting replicas]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/architecture/replication-layer.md %}#non-voting-replicas).
```

For this example, you need to start a [`cockroach demo` cluster]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cockroach-demo.md %}) using the following command, which [defines the available cluster localities using the `--demo-locality` flag]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cockroach-demo.md %}#demo-locality):

{% include_cached copy-clipboard.html %}
~~~ shell
cockroach demo --nodes=5 --demo-locality=region=us-east1:region=us-west1:region=us-central1:region=europe-west1:region=asia-northeast1
~~~

> Next, enter the statements below at the SQL prompt. These statements will:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, enter the following statements at the SQL prompt. These statements will:
```

> - Make the [`movr` database]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/movr.md %}) into a [multiregion database]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/multiregion-overview.md %}) by [setting the primary region]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/alter-database.md %}#set-primary-region).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Make the [`movr` database]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/movr.md %}) into a [multi-region database]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/multiregion-overview.md %}) by [setting the primary region]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/alter-database.md %}#set-primary-region).
```

- Set the `movr` database to [survive region failures]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/multiregion-survival-goals.md %}#survive-region-failures).

> - Add the remaining regions we defined at cluster start time to the multi-region `movr` database (for a total of 5).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Add the remaining regions defined at cluster start time to the multi-region `movr` database (for a total of 5).
```

~~~

By default, all tables in the `movr` database are [`REGIONAL` tables]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/regional-tables.md %}):

{% include_cached copy-clipboard.html %}
~~~ sql
SHOW TABLES;
~~~

~~~
  schema_name |         table_name         | type  | owner | estimated_row_count |              locality
--------------+----------------------------+-------+-------+---------------------+--------------------------------------
  public      | promo_codes                | table | demo  |                1000 | REGIONAL BY TABLE IN PRIMARY REGION
  public      | rides                      | table | demo  |                 500 | REGIONAL BY TABLE IN PRIMARY REGION
  public      | user_promo_codes           | table | demo  |                   5 | REGIONAL BY TABLE IN PRIMARY REGION
  public      | users                      | table | demo  |                  50 | REGIONAL BY TABLE IN PRIMARY REGION
  public      | vehicle_location_histories | table | demo  |                1000 | REGIONAL BY TABLE IN PRIMARY REGION
  public      | vehicles                   | table | demo  |                  15 | REGIONAL BY TABLE IN PRIMARY REGION
(6 rows)
~~~

> Now that our multiregion cluster is configured, we will use the `ALTER LOCALITY` statements shown below to [configure replication zones]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/configure-replication-zones.md %}) such that:

Reviewer: Link ALTER LOCALITY. 

```suggestion
Now that the multi-region cluster is configured, use the `ALTER LOCALITY` statements shown below to [configure replication zones]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/configure-replication-zones.md %}) such that:
```

- The 3 US regions have voting replicas (that is, replicas that participate in [Raft quorum]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/architecture/replication-layer.md %}#raft)).

> - This will leave the 2 additional regions (Europe and Japan) with only [non-voting replicas]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/architecture/replication-layer.md %}#non-voting-replicas) that can be used to serve [follower reads]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/follower-reads.md %}).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The 2 additional regions (Europe and Japan) are left with only [non-voting replicas]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/architecture/replication-layer.md %}#non-voting-replicas) that can be used to serve [follower reads]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/follower-reads.md %}).
```
